CIP-0177? | Ouroboros Tachys - Faster Cardano partner chains (#1149)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: CIP-XXXX/README.md

#### Ouroboros Peras ([CIP-0140])
This addresses the problem of transaction finality. It uses an optimistic mode in which it can achieve finality in fewer blocks, and a mode that falls back to Praos finality guarantees. As such it improves the time to finality that can be observed for submitted transactions in many cases, but it does not improve the guarantee for worst case finality. By contrast, Ouroboros Tachýs improves the worst case and the average case, albeit by a more modest factor.

Peras is a modification of Praos but only makes additions to the block header and validity rules. As such, Tachýs should be fully compatible with Peras. It may make sense to use Peras with Tachýs in some partner chain uses cases, where the trust assumptions closely resemble those of Cardano mainnet. In these cases, finality could be better than with either technology on its own. Of course there is also the throughput benefit that Tachýs brings, which complements the Peras finality improvements.

#### Ouroboros Leios ([CIP-0164])

> This addresses the problem of transaction throughput. In its latest incarnation as "Linear Leios" this takes the form of a one-off (rather than scalable) improvement in throughput by dramatically increasing the effective block size. Linear Leios is targeting a throughput improvement of 30x–60x compared to Cardano mainnet. Linear Leios is a substantial change, with a corresponding expected development time and cost. It is intended for deployment on Cardano mainnet. By contrast, Ouroboros Tachýs is more modest in its throughput goals, more modest in its expected development time and cost and is intended for deployment on Cardano partner chains.

Reviewer: > In its latest incarnation as "Linear Leios" this takes the form of a one-off (rather than scalable) improvement

How is this remark relevant for this CIP?

> In principle, since Linear Leios is a strict extension of Praos, Tachýs should be fully compatible with it. It should be possible to use Linear Leios with Tachýs giving even higher throughput than either technology on its own. Linear Leios may however result in higher transaction latency than a pure Tachýs deployment, and so for some partner chain use cases it may be preferable to disable Linear Leios.

Author: I didn't spell it out in detail (and it's probably not worth spelling out in detail in this CIP) but my reasoning for saying that Linear Leios may result in a higher transaction latency than a pure Tachys deployment goes like this...

Assume that Linear Leios has the same basic latency from when a transaction makes it into the mempool to making it into the first block. Ok, you say sims show it might be slightly lower, so we'll keep that in mind.

Consider how a Linear Leios + Tachys vs a pure Tachys network would be tuned. Linear Leios takes advantages of the big gaps between blocks to put in these jumbo additional blocks. This is great for throughhput and roughly neutral for latency (perhaps some slight reduction). If (and indeed when) there are no such big gaps then the jumbo extra block cannot be included. In a pure Tachys network, the gaps between blocks in the Praos schedule are instead used for more (normal sized) blocks. So basically, a Linear Leios configuration will have higher throughput by having fewer but much bigger blocks, while a Tachys configuration will simply have more frequent but normal sized blocks. The more frequent blocks leads to a lower latency of finality (if not to lower latency of time to first block), at least for a throughput that each configuration can sustain. If a wallet needs to wait 10 blocks to reach its confidence threshold then that simply takes less wall clock time if blocks are produced more frequently.

Perhaps I should adjust the text to say something along these lines without going into full detail. Something like:

> One can expect a throughput vs finality latency trade-off: a Linear Leios configuration with big blocks should be able to achieve higher throughput, while a Tachys configuration configuration with more frequent but smaller blocks should be able to achieve a shorter time to reach a block depth that gives sufficient confidence in finality. Thus for some partner chain use cases that prioritise latency of finality over throughput, it may be preferable to disable Linear Leios.

The cumulative stake distribution associates each SPO identifier with an interval, inclusive below and exclusive above. The width of each SPO's interval is exactly the fraction of total active stake that is delegated to that SPO. The set of intervals are non-overlapping but contiguously cover the range 0 (inclusive) to 1 (exclusive). This uniquely maps any value in [0,1) to an SPO identifier. The interval values can be specified as rationals, using the total active stake as the denominator. Given that the width of each interval is the SPO stake fraction, then this transforms a uniform sample into a stake-weighted sample.

Thus, given a sample in the range [0,1), a unique SPO can be selected from the cumulative stake distribution. This is the slot leader.

A note on efficiency. This selection can be done in log time, in the number of SPOs, using straightforward representations. While the specification is in terms of rational numbers (like other parts of the ledger specification), some simple algebra demonstrates that this can be implemented faithfully using only (big) integer arithmetic.

> #### Computing the cumulative stake distribution

Reviewer: Would this be also guarded by the global switch mentioned above?

### Consensus protocol changes

The changes to the consensus algorithm are minimal.

The consensus algorithm must of course create blocks that are valid. This includes making blocks only when authorised. The consensus algorithm takes the predicate from the formal specification that states when a block producer is authorised to make a block and reuses that predicate to evaluate at the start of each slot if the block producer should make a block.

This is the only consensus change, and it changes only in that it must use the updated predicate from the formal specification. The updated predicate is conditional: in Praos mode the condition is as before, while in Tachýs mode the predicate tests the slot leader schedule as described above.

Everything else is the same. The block header construction is the same, using a KES signature and VRF proof. It is just the condition when the node decides to forge a block that changes.

### No hard fork

> No hard fork is required.

Reviewer: Only because it is not targeting a network that currently runs Praos and no coordinated switch between leader schedules is desired (by your use case).. right?

Furthermore, a hard-fork would not be possible with the given specification of a global switch between Praos/Tachys leader selection.

 * It has complex MPC algorithm to agree the next epoch nonce.
 * MPC is hard to integrate and needs changes to the block body format.
 * It does not use KES.
 * It would not maintain ecosystem compatibility with Cardano using Praos, due to presence of MPC and lack of KES.

#### Ouroboros Tachýs

Advantages

 * It is fully compatible with SPOs and delegation.
 * It has a low complexity of implementation, integration, and maintenance.
 * It would maintain high degree of ecosystem compatibility, due to no changes in the block body or header formats.

Disadvantages:

 * It has no peer-reviewed specification yet. This CIP is the first step towards this.
 * Other disadvantages may become apparent during the review process.

## Path to Active

### Acceptance Criteria

This CIP should move from "Proposed" to "Active" when at least one publicly known Cardano-Cardano partner chain is using Ouroboros Tachýs in a production / mainnet setting (not just a testnet).

For the purpose of this criterion, we define a Cardano-Cardano partner chain to be any chain that uses one or more Cardano-compatible implementations and that is bridged to the Cardano mainnet.

### Implementation Plan

> The plan is to implement and integrate Ouroboros Tachýs into the Haskell reference implementation of the Cardano node. The CIP authors will also cooperate with and advise the authors of other Cardano node implementations who wish to implement Ouroboros Tachýs.

Author: I think it depends on whether the amaru folk want to have their node also be used on partner chains. I talked to one amaru developer at the Berlin summit and they were interested (and understood that it is for partner chains). Ultimately that decision is up to the amaru developers, or developers of any other Cardano node implementation. This spec will be there if/when they want it so that they can be interoperable with other nodes using Tachys on partner chains. Node diversity on partner chains is useful too.

For the reference implementation, that is more of a community owned project, with many people and parties working on it, some funded by the treasury and some not. As we say in our implementation plan, we intend to apply to the treasury for funding for this implementation, and as part of that application we will of course want to set out the costs and benefits. We did not feel that arguing the costs and benefits for one implementation were appropriate for a CIP, which is supposed to be about the specification.

We didn't set out in detail the nature of the global parameter, since we intend it to have the same meaning as the meaning of global parameters in the existing Cardano ledger specifications. Since people don't often re-read the ledger specifications, perhaps it is worth adding text to the CIP to make that explicit: that it should be read the same way as other global parameters, and mention how implementations have interpreted that in practice.

---
CIP: "?"

> Title: "Ouroboros Tachýs - Ouroboros with a public slot leader schedule"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
CIP: "?"
Title: "Ouroboros Tachys - Ouroboros with a public slot leader schedule"
```
Quoting the special `?` character makes sense (among other options like `TBD`), but if the quotes are around the `Title:` to avoid the `ý` character being mapped somehow, then it's another argument not to use it.  The consensus of previous discussions (#1065) was not to include the `Φ` in Phalanx and revert to the Roman alphabet for several reasons, mainly:
* problematic string matches between Roman-only spellings & those with diacritic characters
* Markdown apps and other text processors wanting to "quote" or "escape" the non-roman letter: introducing formatting & parsing problems

Also, since early discussion emphasises that this system will need to propagate, the term itself needs to be easy to reproduce & find in Internet search.  Even if the plain Roman term `Tachys` is a misspelling, it's still the one people generally search for on Google worldwide in the last 5 years:
* https://trends.google.com/explore?q=tach%25C3%25BDs%2Ctachys&date=today%205-y&geo=Worldwide

Author: Thanks @rphair. The only reason I quoted the string metadata is that `pandoc`'s yaml parser expected them to be quoted. It was not about the unicode. I presume github markdown does not care about the quotes so I'll remove them.

You make a good point about the title length. I originally had it shorter, but then changed it to match the pattern of other Ouroboros CIP titles using "Ouroboros X - ...". I'll think of some way to shorten it.

I'm happy to take the suggestion on the latin alphabet for the name in the title. Personally I generally default to using the original script and spelling as much as possible, since as a native English speaker I don't want to be too imperial and debase other people's languages. But you make a good point about searchability.

Author: I think this is now resolved, but let me know otherwise.

Category: Consensus
Status: Proposed
Authors:
 - Duncan Coutts <duncan@well-typed.com>
 - Philipp Kant <philipp@ensurable.systems>
Implementors:
 - Well-Typed LLP
 - Ensurable Systems Ltd

> Discussions: https//https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-???

Author: In the CIP body text I only claim that this CIP is a partial solution to these two CPSs but I do qualify that by saying it is only for the partner chains scenario.

I'm happy to go with the consensus on the `Solution-To:` metadata, since that doesn't have a lot of room for nuance.

Ouroboros Leios ([CIP-0164])
: This addresses the problem of transaction throughput. In its latest incarnation as "Linear Leios" this takes the form of a one-off (rather than scalable) improvement in throughput by dramatically increasing the effective block size. Linear Leios is targeting a throughput improvement of 30x–60x compared to Cardano mainnet. Linear Leios is a substantial change, with a corresponding expected development time and cost. It is intended for deployment on Cardano mainnet. By contrast, Ouroboros Tachýs is more modest in its throughput goals, more modest in its expected development time and cost and is intended for deployment on Cardano partner chains.

: In principle, since Linear Leios is a strict extension of Praos, Tachýs should be fully compatible with it. It should be possible to use Linear Leios with Tachýs giving even higher throughput than either technology on its own. Linear Leios may however result in higher transaction latency than a pure Tachýs deployment, and so for some partner chain use cases it may be preferable to disable Linear Leios.

> ## Rationale

Author: Will do.

The SPO identifiers used here are the same kind of SPO identifiers used throughout the existing Cardano ledger specification: a hash of the SPO's cold verification key. The SPO identifier from the block header is already used elsewhere in the specification and is computed by hashing the cold verification key presented in the block header. The existing KES-based authentication checks ensure that the block header really is created by the declared SPO, so we can rely on the SPO identifier from the block header.

Some minor refactoring of the existing rule makes the introduction of a conditional schedule rule clear and simple. The new conditional rule is somewhat analogous to the overlay schedule of the Shelley era, but with a global parameter deciding which rule is applied, instead of applying rules according to the overlay schedule.

#### Computing the slot leader schedule

The Tachýs slot leader schedule assigns a single SPO identity to each slot within an epoch. This can be computed independently for any slot number within the epoch. It works as follows.

> For a given epoch with a known epoch nonce, and for a given slot number we compute a pseudo-random sample value. This sample value is used to select from a (cumulative) stake distribution, to determine an SPO identifier.

Reviewer 3: Making the slot leader schedule public breaks adaptive security. This opens the door to grinding attacks where an adversary can influence the epoch nonce.

Reviewer 3: Nice, so far I think that your definitions about what currently is running on mainnet, like the clear separation of authentication vs authorization, are great!

Author: > And this relates to my remark about whether we should add something to a code base that models a different (stronger) security model, as it gives a false sense of security (not a good practice).

It is worth noting that the _existing_ reference implementation of Cardano includes code for several different protocols, with different security models:

 * PBFT -- "permissive" BFT: a transitional protocol used during the Byron reboot. The early part of the mainnet chain is validated using this protocol's validity rules.
 * TPraos -- "transitional" Praos: a transitional protocol used during the Shelley era while SPOs were still coming online. It combined a BFT round robin schedule for "core" block producers with a Praos private slot leader schedule, with a parameter to control the fraction of blocks from each. Thus this had a partially public / partially private slot leader schedule. This was also therefore not secure against an adaptive adversary that corrupts the old core block producers.
 * Praos
 * OBFT -- Ouroboros BFT, but actually just a cut-down simplified version, not the one from the paper. It just uses the Ouroboros longest chain rule in combination with a round robin schedule. Obviously this is only intended for use against a 30% adversary.

The first three of these are used on mainnet (for current or historical parts of the chain). Anyone can use them in the older era in test nets or partner chains. Hopefully they are aware of the security trade-offs! I don't think we make this as clear as we could do.

> IMO, following the Unix philosophy, cardano-node should focus on one thing and do that really well: securing the Cardano mainnet. We have a great history of taking security seriously and being the slow but methodical chain; let's not throw that overboard.

Obviously we've always taken security seriously, but with accommodations and compromises to practicality and resource constraints (see for example the ongoing saga with the lack of proper KES). I would say we don't follow a Unix philosophy of do a single thing, but rather we always tried to make the code modular. This allows multiple protocols, multiple ledgers. And we have taken advantage of that flexibility, even on mainnet by having several variations over the years. We also originally designed the code with non-mainnet applications in mind. We demoed a "pokemon" ledger, and as noted above the code includes a BFT demo protocol. This has been carried in the codebase for _years_ without significant maintenance cost (because the code is structured in a modular way).

Reviewer: > The first three of these are used on mainnet

FWIW, I have just recently asked in the consensus working group why there is still block production code for old consensus protocols (and the Byron era). It's entirely possible that things that are not needed to re-validate mainnet to be dropped from `cardano-node` (the implementation you have been speaking about here I suppose). And if OBFT was never used, that is a good candidate of code to be dropped too. (I just opened an [issue](https://github.com/IntersectMBO/ouroboros-consensus/issues/1884) about it)

Reviewer 4: Hi everyone, I saw you started talking a bit more about grinding so I thought that I could give my opinion there. :) 

Regardless of whether the adaptive security model is realistic or not, and even without relying on this model, we demonstrated in the CIP with @nhenin that grinding attacks are possible. We did so without full knowledge of what the adversary can and want to do (can they DDOS, corrupt... ?), only with some probabilistic analysis.

The 50% limit is simply a limit/hypothesis chosen to prove when you have security. It does not mean there is a "hey no fair" rule in practice of course, simply that theoretically we do not know how much and cannot guarantee security  when an adversarsy has more, and so restrain the security argument to that case. You have to put a limit somewhere if you want to argue about security and come up with an efficient protocol, that is pretty much all that there is to it.
For grinding more specifically, you can grind with much less stake than that. The chances of having a "natural", "passive" grinding attacks become superlinear after 20% or 30% stake iirc. But there are "active" ways to increase your attack chances  (by snowballing over several epochs, not considering consecutive last blocks but simple majority over a period if you fork, etc.). 

Public elections are inherently more risky in blockchains as you have more information. If you think with the adaptive security model in mind, the adversary does not have to corrupt someone at random but can target it directly. That is much easier and effective, but still might not sound really realistic.
For grinding attacks more specifically, we do not need something as strong as corruption though. Simply DDOSing enough block producers, or preventing block transmission for example, to get a a high enough majority of blocks at the end of an epoch is sufficient.
To stress it again, we technically do not need to own the last consecutive blocks at the end of the epoch for a grinding attack, a majority of block at the end is sufficient. Knowing who are the block producers, the adversary can increase their majority efficiently and have their blocks be the de facto blocks ones (for instance by DDOSing block producers or preventing block transmission).
